The presented results are the culmination of a multidisciplinary study, started at the 2014 CIDER summer program, of the dynamics and energetics of Mercury’s interior. Of the findings of the MESSENGER spacecraft, one of the more surprising is the confirmation that the smallest terrestrial planet has an internally generated, dipolar magnetic field, which is likely driven by a combination of thermal and compositional buoyancy sources. This observation places constraints on the thermal and energetic state of Mercury’s large iron core, and also on mantle dynamics because dynamo operation is strongly dependent on the amount of heat extracted from the core by the mantle. However, some observations point to several factors that should disfavour a present-day dynamo. These include physical constraints on a thin, possibly non-convecting mantle, as well as certain properties of liquid iron alloys that promote compositional stratification in the core. The highly reduced state of Mercury’s surface suggests that the core should contain high concentrations of silicon, in addition to sulphur, which would lower the efficiency of compositionally driven convection. This is potentially of great importance to the dynamo because compositional buoyancy sources, such as those arising from the crystallisation of an inner core, are intrinsically more efficient than purely thermal sources. 

In order to assess whether a dynamo can operate, we must consider the entropy budget of the planetary core. This budget requires information about several important quantities, including CMB heat flux, core composition, partitioning of light elements between inner and outer cores and the gradients of the melting and adiabatic temperature curves. We present a suite of entropy budgets for Mercury’s core, attempting to account for the large uncertainties on some parameters by considering various end member cases. For a range of self-consistent internal structures, core compositions and thermal evolution models that are also consistent with observational constraints, we assess the circumstances under which a dynamo is permitted to operate in Mercury’s core. We also present the thermal evolution models and 1D parameterised convection models associated with the entropy calculations, along with insights into the iron-sulphur-silicon phase diagrams and possible core composition. 

A long-term spatial temperature difference resulting from the planet’s orbital resonance may play an important role in driving a dynamo in Mercury. We compare simulations of mantle heat flow using the ASPECT convection code to predictions from the parameterised models and produce heat flow maps at the CMB. These heat flow maps, along with the information previously described, are then input into the Calypso dynamo model in order to simulate fluid dynamics and magnetic field generation inside Mercury’s core. 

Seismology?
